your colleagues when you got here? Who were they
and what were their specialties and so forth?
Before I do that, there's one more thing I thought
of that Jack Williams said that evening that I've
not forgotten. One, and I don't recall, this is not
a direct quote, but it's fairly close. He said,
right as his closing comments, he said, I hope that
you're all welcome here. We're pleased that you
came our way. You'll make us better for having been
here. But I hope each of you, like young people, And
I hope that you think they are our best hope for the
future. And if you don't, I hope your stay here is
very, very short. And I remember that and have used
that many times along the way. In our department
when I got here was a guy named Linus Dow. And Linus
was a biomechanics type person. He studied the
angles of bouncing balls and muscle joints and
those kind of things, the most efficient way to do
an activity. course Carl Landis was the
department head. Carl had gotten his degree at
Penn State and Landis had gotten his degree at
Missouri.
There's a guy named Jack Chivret who was a Canadian
who did his undergraduate work in Springfield
College which was the very first program in
physical education where basketball was that's
right that's right and he he had gotten his
doctorate from florida state he ran he did the
student teaching program and did that very well he
was very organized and detailed and and took care
of things well emil mamaluga who was the director
of the act what we call the activity program then
the the program where they taught taught
different sports skills like golf and tennis and
racquetball and so forth. Leslie Palmer was the
admiral director. We had an adjunct whose name was
Dr. Bill Roman, no BGYN in town, who taught a human
diseases course. Mildred Little had come in with
me and she was an outdoor education type person.
Homer Tolson, testing measurements,
statistics. He came from Purdue. One of the very
best teachers I've ever seen, and certainly one of
the best I've seen in that particular field.
Robert Hurley was my colleague in health
education and had a degree from Utah, University
of Utah. And George Jessup. who was in exercise
physiology and he came from the University of
Southern California. And every one of those guys
and gals are now retired, which gave me my first
clue that it was time for me to retire. Also, they
seem to me to be geographically diverse. Very
diverse faculty. We had, I see, I guess had a degree
from A&M and Les Palmer did. And they were the only
ones with local degrees. And everyone else was
spread out. Dow from Missouri, Landis from Penn
State, Florida State, Mildred Little from the
University of Texas, Tolson, Purdue, Hurley,
Utah, I was from Tennessee, and Jessup from USC. So
it was an eclectic group. As far as you can recall,
what were your first course assignments? I came
here to direct the Allied Health Program. And so my
first year I was 75% time on that grant. Okay. The
next year I was 50% time. The following year I was
25% time and then I was 100%. So my first teaching
assignment was to teach an undergraduate class
methodology, methods of teaching health. And for
the first time, I taught that course before, but as
I said earlier, at Southeastern, we taught 15
hours a semester and you just hardly could do
anything except go to school and write papers. For
the first time, I had a chance to really planned for
that class and I thought I got pretty good at it. I
also taught a graduate course called Health
Careers which no longer exists and for good
reason. Now this first course was for
upper-class? It was a capstone course for our
graduating seniors. Describe your first
impression of Aggie students. Well I had mostly
men I think there was three girls, three or four
girls in that class, and it was a large class, about
40 in there. Nearly all of them wore boots. All of
them were in uniform, except there were a handful
of men who were not in uniform and, of course, none
of the women.
They were... They were good students. I was
singularly impressed with that. Of course, the
school where I was in southeast Louisiana didn't
draw the very best of students than it was anyway,
so that was a step up from that point of view. But
they were good kids. They were well-behaved. If
you called on them, they would give you an at you.
But if you didn't call on them, they weren't going
to volunteer anything. Very polite. Attended.
You didn't have to worry about whether they were
going to be in school or not. They came? They came to
class. In that era, did you check the roll? I did
check the roll. I did it for a reason entirely
different than attendance, though. Until
several years later, I tried to learn every
student's name. And by the end of the first three or
four weeks, if I called roll every day, I would have
it. And these students, as far as you could tell,
where were they from and what was their basic
philosophical outlook on life? It had a definite
rural blend to it. Like now, there were some
students from Houston and some from Dallas, but
most of them were regional kids from Brenham and
Hearn and Snook and places like that. A lot of them,
looking back, I didn't think about it then because
it didn't seem unreasonable to me, but looking
back, are unusual to me. Looking back, I... I think
most of them were first-generation college kids,
and pretty much in awe of the university. Their
philosophy was, let me get in, get this done, and
get out. I have to go to work. Were most of them
majors in the department? Yeah, all of these would
be majors, because it was a capstone. And as far as
you could tell, what was their career goal? They
were all going to be teachers or coaches. At that
time, that's the only option we had in our program.
And how did they introduce you to any Aggie ways of
doing things or excuses or pranks? Oh, I learned
more stuff that year than I would ever learn. Share
some of it. Well, believe it or not, I had never
heard an Aggie joke until I came on this campus. All
the Aggie jokes I heard were here. And one of the
things I had learned pretty quick as I moved out, I
spent that first year in Austin a lot because I was
developing this allied health program and
putting together brochures and things. And I was
moving around the state trying to meet some of the
schools where that was being taught. And
everywhere I'd go, people would be delighted to
tell me an Aggie joke. So I put a few pro-Aggie jokes
in my arsenal to use along the way. Of course, the
walk, I'd never heard of the walk before. They
tried to introduce that to me very quickly. We need
a walk on Friday. I'll never forget the first
elephant walk. I thought we were being marched on
by, this was 72, and they were still marching in
some campus. I thought they were They were about to
march on the president's office.
CT, that term came up, and I had the ignorance of
asking what that meant in class. And a lot of red
faces, and one kid said, Dr. Ponder, I'll tell you
after class. But they all giggle about that. Do you
remember any, in that first year or so, any pranks
or jokes on you that they attempted? No, they
didn't. I
always had the kind of demeanor, I think, that kept
a glass wall someplace. Someone taught me that
pretty early. But I remember wearing an orange tie
to class one day. I had to go home and dig all that
stuff out, because coming out of Tennessee, I had
some orange things. Did someone say anything? Oh,
yes. They said, we don't like your tie. And I said,
well, I normally let my wife dress me. I thought it
went all right. She said, it's not that. We don't
like the color of your tie. I said, well, it matches
all right. No, it doesn't match A&M at all. That's
a good one. Let's see.
You were there pretty well all day. Did Dr. Landis
practice himself the expectations he had? Oh yes.
No question about that. He was there early and he
left late. And how did he keep the department
pooled together? Did you all have regular
meetings? We had regular meetings. At that time,
we could all meet in a room smaller than this one.
But we would have regular faculty meetings. And of
course, he used memos with great regularity. We
had a meeting place like all the departments had
then. We had a coffee room and a mail room. It was
kind of common practice around 10 o'clock, if you
didn't have a class, you wandered down and checked
your mail. And there were a lot of impromptu
meetings would occur right there around a coffee
pot. And so, by and large, you all had coffee in the
department? Yes, we did. And then where did you and
your closest colleagues go eat lunch? Across the
street, MSC was right across the street from us, so
a lot of people would go over there. I would go home
often. It wasn't that hard of a drive. Even though
it was quite a piece of way, I could make it in about
seven minutes. I had, I think, two lights between
me and the house. And you parked? I parked right by
my building, walked right to it. Was there even a
parking fee? There was no parking fee. I thought I
didn't remember one at that time. We had a bumper
sticker, but no parking fee.
In terms of how did you and your wife, how did you all
become part of the community?
That was no problem at all. This, as you know, is an
unusual community. We were told when we got here
that we'd be busy. And we looked around and saw a
sleepy little town. And how could that be? And we
realized early on that you had to learn to say no
because there were just so many opportunities
that came your way. But what really impressed us
was we came from, Southeastern is a strong Italian
town. Granted, some Cajun in that area, but mostly
Italians. And they're very slow to take you in, and
really good people. Once they adopt you, you're
adopted. But we didn't have that problem here.
Even the grocery stores, folks were friendly. And
I still hear that. When we get a new faculty who
comes in for an interview, they still remark about
how friendly people are. So we were absorbed. It
was almost like we had always lived here. One thing
that helped us was there was a guy named Walter
Penberthy, which we call Penny. Penny's wife and
my wife's mother were good friends.
One of my wife's mother's good friends had gone to
school with Lollibeth. And so we knew them almost
instantly. And when we came for an interview, we
were told to look them up. But we didn't. We didn't
know them from anyone else. But after we got here
and we settled and knew them, well, really worked
us over for not having come by our house. But they
instantly introduced us to their circle of
friends. And the department had several social
kinds of things during the year. Yeah, describe
those. Well, we had an ice cream social to begin the
year. Everybody could turn a half gallon of ice
cream. And we had cookies and ice cream. We had a
golf tournament in the early part of the year and at
the end of the year. They had what they called the
fin and feather tournament, where the fin was
fishing and feather was birdies for golf. And we
did those kinds of activities. And then having a
watering hole in the department helped an awful
lot. It was an easy matriculation from that point
of view. Did you all join any organizations off
campus, churches, anything? Well, we were. Of
course, we're Baptists, so we very quickly joined
the First Baptist Church in Bryan, and that's
instant family and friends. I tried my hand at the
Qantas Club for a short time. I joined a breakfast
club, but gosh, those guys eat early in the
morning. Trying to get up and get to that and then
get to work was more than I could do. And the wives
got together quite often. They had what they
called the nitwits, which they would get together
and knit. The faculty wives in the department. So
that should be spelled K-N-I-T. That's right. And
those girls are still real close friends. Some of
them moved as far away as Colorado, and they still
keep up with one another. Let me turn this off a
second. That first fall, Did you and your wife ever
talk about whether or not you, that this was a good
place to be? Oh, yeah. We, I bet we weren't here two
weeks. And I came in one day and said, I'm going back
to Southeastern. I just don't fit in here. Health
really wasn't a high priority in Carl's mind. He
was a physical educator and that's what he was
pushing. I didn't see that changing real soon. And
I had a real good situation back there. And, of
course, my wife didn't want to do that at all. She
liked it here. She instantly liked it. And we
talked about it. Had she been willing to go, I
probably, at the end of that year, would have gone.
And that would have been the biggest mistake that
I'd ever made at any time. All right. Then what led
you to change that? One of the big things was
that... at dinner that we talked about. That
really made a big difference.
But as I got to know Carl better, and as he got to know
me better, I came to realize he just wanted good
programs. He wasn't going to line up and try to
develop health. That wasn't his field. But he had
had a long line of folks in that area that had not
done very good work. And as that got better, I
looked at the university differently. And then I
got to know, oh, one of the social clubs I joined,
I'm an avid golfer, you probably know that, I
joined Blackrest, and I got to know a lot of the guys
over there, a lot of the guys in vet medicine. Roy
England and Fred Heck and, I mean, just Mike Tatum,
just a whole host of them. And I never met anybody
from that field that weren't just 100% solid
people. And that added to it. But I guess the
biggest thing was the fact that But I got the
feeling that I could fit in here and it would work.
Describe how you developed your plans for the
health education program and then how they came to
become reality. Two things were happening. The
allied health program that I was in charge of, the
idea behind it was that we needed more allied
health people like medical technologists and
dental hygienists and physical therapists. But
there weren't enough schools to train them. And
people who were in those fields wanted to be doing
that kind of work and not teaching because it
scared them to get out of the doing. They'd lose
their skills. And our role was to identify folks
who were out in the practice, convince them to come
back and get a master's degree or a doctoral degree
so they then could take faculty jobs. And early on,
that wasn't going well. I'd go and talk to people,
and they'd say, well, good luck. But there weren't
many takers then. When I came on board, Carl had
identified six or eight folks who were going to be
there in September, and none of them showed up. We
finally, toward the end of the year, we got one
person in who was not a strong student. He was a good
student, but it was not a good match. It worked out
all right, but it was a difficult one. And it took a
while to get that going. and primarily it involved
building brochures and mail outs and going to
professional meetings and visiting and shaking
hands and talking and I guess somewhere around the
end of that first year, I began to see, I thought it
wasn't gonna happen, it began to happen. And then
we got a federal grant which paid for some
scholarships, some fellowships actually for
those folks and that really got it going. Did you
write that proposal? I wrote that proposal and in
fact hand delivered it up to Washington, which was
another thing that impressed me about A&M. I got a
lot of help in doing that. There was a lot of
offices, as you know, on campus where people could
help you build budgets, and here are some things
you shouldn't put in here, and here are things you
should put in. And like all those deadlines, they
were real tight. And I came down to the wire, and
they said, well, jump on a plane and take it up
there. And that's what I did. And
not many people got those grants. We were one of, I
think, five institutions that got them. How many
students did that? That supported... three
doctoral students, and five master's students
for about five years. And so they began to arrive in
the fall of? Oh, let's see, this would be 72, 82,
probably 83 is when they started arriving. You say
80? No, no, 70. I came in 72. 72 was a dry year. 73, I
saw a little 74. 74. Yeah. 1974, I started seeing
them come in in great numbers. And we had a nucleus
of people. And then it was a matter of just writing a
letter and responding and treating people like
human beings. And we had it going. As you look back,
were some of those first students real key people?
We had one guy. His name was Leo Selker that became
the associate provost at the University of
Chicago, Illinois. We had another. Gerald Boe,
who became the executive director of NACLS, which
is the professional organization. NACLS, and I
can't tell you what that is. It's a medical
technology. N-A-K-O-L? N-A-C-L-E-S, NACLS.
National Association of, and I can't tell you what
it is. We had a woman who became one of the vice
presidents of Herman Hospital. There were
several really good. Bill Thompson is at Baylor
College of Medicine now in the Department of
Community Medicine. Just a large number of them
that did well. And these people were coming
geographically from the South? From all over.
From all over. Buffalo, New York, Arizona,
Oklahoma.
Not every state in the Union, but there was, we had
a, and not many local. And who were your allies as
you were trying to build this health program in the
department? Who were your allies? In the
university, there were no enemies. I mean, nearly
every place I went, I got help. I wasn't used to
that. I've always been singularly impressed
about that, about this institution. It's so easy
to build collaborations, or has been until just
recent years anyway. Don Clark probably helped me
more than anyone because he was associate dean for
research in the college.
He was my number one person I turned to when I needed
help. But we had a collaboration with Baylor
College of Medicine at that time and the folks down
there were helpful also. The
Department of Community Medicine then, they had a
program in allied health that actually got the
seminal grant in which I was assigned to. At the
same time that was going on, Robert Hurley was
coordinator of health education and he was
building an undergraduate degree in health. We
didn't have that. And he and I were sharing an
office so we would bounce ideas back and forth and
within a year, We had that approved by the
coordinating board, and that changed things
entirely as far as life as a health educator was
concerned. It wasn't long until we had 150 majors,
and then that went up to about 300 undergraduate
majors. So it built pretty quickly. And was this in
the 70s? This would be 74, roughly 74, 73 or 74.
Let's see
this. No, 73, that was approved. Very good. Was
there then a true health science major in the
department pretty soon, undergraduate? Yes,
yes. We got the undergraduate degree first, which
is kind of unusual in health. It has been in reverse
before. We got the master's and PhD probably in
1978, somewhere along in there. But that meant
then that we would have health educators majoring
in health, and physical educators majoring in
physical education. And then there were some
crossover. Some of the physical educators would
take some health classes. What other
institutions in the Southwest were offering a
similar, making similar effort at that point? We
were among the first. In the Southwest, I don't
think there was a single school. No one had a pure
degree. There were some that had a... a program
that was singled off of physical education, but I
think we were the first ones. I can't think of it.
Did you have a school somewhere else that was your
model? Tennessee was my model. They had that kind
of program. Utah was Hurley's model. There were
others, but most of them were in the west and the
northeast. As this enrollment grew, were you able
to bring in new faculty? We were. Of course, those
were the growing days of faculty. We were bringing
in one or two faculty every year almost. But when I
got here, there were three faculty in health.
There's Robert and me and Gail Smith, who was a
lecturer working on a doctorate. And we have 10 or
11 there now, I think. Physical education had,
well, they had one, two, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, and one of those was the department
head. And I don't know what the head count over
there is now. It's considerably different. All
right, and as the semesters went on, you started
having a heavier teaching load and a heavier
leadership responsibility. Did you have any
particular title Were you the... I was the
coordinator of Allied Health. Coordinator of
Allied Health. That was a departmental title. No
one else on campus recognized it, but that's where
we distinguished it. And what are some of the other
courses you began to teach? I continued to teach
the methodology class. I began to teach research
methods then. And I taught a measurement and
evaluation class. And I taught an Allied Health
seminar for Allied Health graduates. And I began
to get a lot of 691s, a lot of dissertations. In
fact, at one time, the Allied Health people were
the only health folks at the doctoral level. And I
suddenly realized I was carrying a pretty heavy
load there. And so, like all good faculty, I went in
to ask for some relief. And Carl gave me some
relief, particularly in the summertime. He
helped me a little bit. Describe some of your
learning experiences as a new thesis and
dissertation director at AMU. Of course, we have
the model here that you become a co-chair
and then you chair a committee. Well, my first job
was to co-chair with Carl Landis. And
unfortunately, we had this first Allied Health
student who was a little bit of a mismatch anyway.
And I pretty quickly learned that co-chair didn't
mean co-pilot. No, it didn't mean co-chair, but it
meant co-pilot. And so I'm sure I was frustrated
some part of that time because I felt like that I
knew how to do that. And my ideas were a little
different than what Carl's ideas were. But in
retrospect, I think it's a good thing, especially
the steps you have to go through in order to keep the
student out of trouble. I think it was good. Of
course, George Coonsey played an important role
in that time. I don't know whether this ought to be
on the tape or not, but I think we lost something
when we lost George Coonsey. Oh, no. See, those are
the kind of things we do want to know. Why did you
think so highly? What was good about his? What I
liked was what some people didn't like. He
expected everyone to adhere to a certain
standard. And when you didn't adhere to that
standard, then he bucked it back to you. And you had
to get it in shape before it came back to it. Well, it
seems now that just almost anything goes. Before
we did final defenses, we had to have the thing on
blue line. Now it's a rough draft that I look at
often when I go to a final defense and more rough
than anything else. And he didn't pull punches. He
didn't mind looking you in the eye and telling you
this is what he thought. And I like that guy. He
saved me an awful lot when I was department head,
but he helped me an awful lot when I was a faculty
member too. As the 70s are moving along, did you and
your colleagues feel like progress was being
made? Oh, yeah. I thought, in a lot of ways, the 70s
were the Camelot years for us. When I came here, I
was taken by how much obvious devotion there was
between faculty and students. Students often
would praise a faculty member and talk about, how
they felt about them. And former students would
talk about how much they actually loved some of
their faculty. And faculty, when they talked
about students, would do likewise. In fact, more
than once I'd go in the office and one that I
remember best was Homer Tolson that we talked
about earlier. He had a needlepoint on his wall
that said, students come first in this office
always. And he meant that. If I came in as a faculty
member and he had a student and I tried to interrupt
that He let me know very quickly that he wasn't
available right then. In a lot of ways, I thought we
met our mission in those years as well as we ever
have. But yes, no question, we were making
headway. We were being hamstrung to some degree by
the growth of the place. We were always behind the
curve in terms of facilities and those kind of
things. Now, did you ever in those early years have
any male-female situations in class where the...
where the Aggie male didn't want the Aggie female
there? I never did. I never did. I know it happened
some in the Corps. I know we had some difficulty in
integrating the band with women. But I never did in
our department. In fact, I can remember as
department head getting an enrollment report one
time, and this was like the mid-'80s. And I looked
at it and I said, Linda, Linda was my secretary,
we've got more women than we have men in this
department. She says, no, we don't. We counted up,
and we were 10 or 15 more women than men. And that
slipped up on us. I didn't realize it happened. I
don't think we had any problem with that,
certainly not in classrooms. What about ethnic
diversity? It wasn't very much then. It wasn't
very much ethnic diversity then. But do you
remember any problems with Hispanic students? I
didn't remember any. I think what happened
occurred out in the and then formal settings. Of
course, in our classes, in our physical education
activity classes, that's where integration
occurred best because everyone was equal there
and the best skilled one got the ball the most. In
the classrooms, I didn't see any sign of it. But we
just, in our field, It's kind of a unique thing
about ethnic diversity. We didn't have many
minorities who came into our field because they
were good enough to go to college. They often
elected a business or liberal arts often, and they
didn't just elect our program. Even though most
people on campus thought that most of the athletes
came to our department, that wasn't true for the
most part. We had to recruit. blacks to get them in
our faculty. We had to actually work at getting
that and I was I'm kind of proud of the fact that I
hired the first one and that's after I became
department head. All right now we'll want to work
that in a little bit. In those early years do you
remember any realities with athletes in class?
You don't have to name names.